DM-37858: Initial draft (#1)
lsst-sqre/sqr-074: index.rst

:tocdepth: 1

Abstract
========

> The purpose of Phalanx_ has expanded from its original role specific to the Rubin Science Platform to providing an installation and configuration platform for a variety of Kubernetes clusters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The purpose of Phalanx_ has expanded from its original role in managing the configuration for the Rubin Science Platform to providing an installation and configuration platform for services deployed on Kubernetes clusters, which may contain any number of Rubin Science Platform services or none.
```

> New, minimal installations need validation to ensure that basic services are running correctly, including mechanisms to both manually and automatically test.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
New, minimal installations need validation to ensure that basic services are running correctly, including mechanisms to both manually and automatically test. Feedback that an installation has worked (or how it may be failing) is particularly useful for deployers without previous experience with phalanx, and is an important element towards productizing the platform for further community use. 
```

.. _mobu: https://github.com/lsst-sqre/mobu
.. _system-test: https://github.com/lsst-sqre/system-test

While mobu can easily be generalized to run other checks, it is designed to exercise services within the same Kubernetes deployment.
In a Phalanx deployment not intended for use as a Science Platform, none of the services mobu knows how to exercise may exist.
Currently, there is no separate service designed specifically for exercising basic Phalanx functionality that is appropriate to deploy in Phalanx environments that are not intended to run Science Platform services.

Desired state
-------------

Phalanx should have a well-defined minimal functionality, independent of any services (including Science Platform services) deployed on top of it, and a corresponding well-defined group of minimal services that are mandatory on any Phalanx deployment.
As part of that minimal set, add a new web service, Muster [#]_, which provides web pages that verify basic deployment functionality.

.. [#] A "phalanx" is a military formation, and one musters a military unit to account for all of its members and ensure they are present.

>        A Phalanx deployment in which all Muster web pages report success would then "pass Muster."

Reviewer: Approve

#. Query a Muster endpoint that requires authentication without providing the token and check that a 401 status is returned.
#. Create a token for ``bot-check-muster`` without any scopes, and query one of the Muster endpoints that requires authentication.
   Check the return status and the correctness of the headers.
#. Pass an invalid token to the same endpoint and check the return status and correctness of the headers and response body.

The last two steps test the special Gafaelfawr integration with ingress-nginx to pass additional headers and a correct return status and response body when an auth subrequest handler fails.

For ongoing testing, we want mobu to run the same code periodically.

To avoid duplicating the same code in multiple places, we can add this code to mobu as a new ``MusterRunner`` class.
Then, add a new endpoint to mobu that, rather than starting a continuous runner, executes a runner once and returns its results directly as the response of that endpoint.
Validation testing can then be done by deploying mobu without any configured monkeys (test runners), and then invoking that endpoint to run the ``MusterRunner``.

> (The drawback of this approach is that it adds mobu to the minimum application set for a Phalanx deployment, but that seems better than duplicating this code or creating a new special-purpose library package that will require ongoing maintenance.)

Reviewer: I don't see a problem with that, mobu is fairly lightweight, does not require resources that would not be otherwise available to phalanx and so on.
